            International Journal of

          Neonatal Screening

Article

Post-Analytical Tools for the Triage of Newborn
Screening Results in Follow-up Can Reduce
Confirmatory Testing and Guide
Performance Improvement

Patricia L. Hall 1,* , Angela Wittenauer 1 and Arthur Hagar 2
  1 Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
  2 Georgia Department of Public Health, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA
 * Correspondence: patricia.l.hall@emory.edu

  Received: 18 February 2020; Accepted: 12 March 2020; Published: 14 March 2020

 Abstract: Georgia uses post-analytical tools through Collaborative Laboratory Integrated Reports
 (CLIR) to triage abnormal newborn screening (NBS) results for follow-up. Condition specific tools are
 used to assign each case a risk level, which is used to guide follow-up recommendations. Follow-up
 recommendations include assessment by the child's primary care provider as well as testing, either a
 repeat NBS or confirmatory testing. Triaging abnormal cases using these tools has been advantageous
 in managing the workflow for the follow-up team, as well as prioritizing cases that appropriately
 require more attention and resources. The initial goal in utilizing these tools was to reduce the amount
 of confirmatory testing, particularly for disorders where there are many false positives. We assessed
 the performance of these tools retrospectively for three of the most commonly detected conditions by
 tandem mass spectrometry in Georgia: phenylketonuria, medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
 deficiency and very long chain dehydrogenase deficiency. The post-analytical tools appropriately
 assigned all true positive cases to the higher levels of follow-up testing and reduced the level of
 intervention for a significant number of cases as well. Based on the experience gained from our
 utilization of the tools in the follow-up program, we are well situated to move forward with using
 the tools in a more prospective manner, and reduce the number of cases that will be reported, rather
 than just assigning resources appropriately at follow-up. Post-analytical tools are an improvement
 over trying to capture the variation in the newborn population using multiple cutoffs. It also easily
 identifies significant abnormalities that are unrelated to inherited disease, such as large amino acid
 elevations due to total parenteral nutrition.

 Keywords: newborn screening; newborn screening follow-up; post-analytical tools;
 performance improvement

1. Introduction

      As a public health program, newborn screening (NBS) encompasses much more than the laboratory
and bedside tests that provides the result that either reassures or refers for further analysis [1]. Recently,
NBS systems have encountered increased scrutiny, and an increased emphasis has been placed on
performance improvement. In this environment, it is incumbent upon NBS systems to evaluate their
performance and identify opportunities for improvement [2]. The laboratory is usually the primary
target for performance improvement initiatives, as the metrics are readily available and changes at the
laboratory can impact the largest number of patients quickly. Post-analytical tools have been used
in NBS to improve positive predictive values (PPV) in the laboratory for many disorders [3ｭ5]. The
current iteration of post-analytical tools through Collaborative Laboratory Integrated Reports (CLIR;

Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, 20; doi:10.3390/ijns6010020  www.mdpi.com/journal/ijns
Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, 20  2 of 8

www.clir.mayo.edu) have an extensive database of cases, and reference data which can be used to
identify abnormal screens by comparison to confirmed cases, rather than deviation from the reference
range [3]. Implementation of post-analytical tools in the laboratory setting can be dependent upon
laboratory information systems and vendor support, making it a challenge for some programs which
may be resource strapped. These challenges do not mean that such programs cannot still benefit from
the utilization of such tools in other ways.

      When there are abnormal results for a condition detected by NBS, the infant needs to be identified
and recalled for follow-up. Standardized recommendations exist for testing and assessments that need
to be done for specific disorders [6]. For conditions which can require immediate medical attention
and intervention where there may exist a high probability of false positive (FP) results, additional
triage is required to ensure infants who require follow-up receive the proper attention, CLIR tools
have been important in follow-up for identifying these cases out of the cohort of FP screens. For many
laboratory tests, different cutoffs, including higher "critical" or "panic" values can identify high priority
laboratory results, but this approach is not always ideal for NBS, particularly for amino acid disorders.
Many of the most significantly elevated values encountered in NBS are obvious FP results due to
collection of a screen while an infant is receiving total parenteral nutrition (TPN) or from a central
line [7,8]. All abnormal NBS results exist within the infant's clinical context, and developing robust
algorithms to identify all of these situations is difficult. For some disorders, even mild elevations are
practically diagnostic (succinylacetone in tyrosinemia type I [9], or alloisoleucine in maple syrup urine
disease [9,10]).

      In Georgia, laboratory testing for NBS disorders is performed at the state public health laboratory.
Follow-up for all disorders except hemoglobinopathies is coordinated through Emory University.
Hemoglobinopathy follow-up is coordinated through the Department of Public Health. Results are
transmitted from the state laboratory to the follow-up team, into a custom-built database. This database
generates lists of cases which require follow-up. Follow-up protocols are developed in consultation
with specialists and approved by the medical director. The follow-up team is made up of registered
nurses and a genetic counselor, who provide information to primary care providers and recommend
testing based on the screening results utilizing established protocols. To triage follow-up, Georgia's
follow-up team has been using post-analytical tools for over ten years. Initially, early versions of the
Region 4 Stork tools were utilized to better prioritize screens that were positive for very long chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency. This decision was an attempt to prioritize cases that
needed to be referred to metabolic specialists and also to reduce confirmatory testing in favor of repeat
screens, and deal with the large number of carriers who have a biochemical phenotype [11]. Georgia
has the same shortages of genetics professionals as the rest of the United States, and minimizing
unneeded appointments is crucial. As post-analytical tools for more conditions became available,
follow-up protocols were adjusted to accommodate them. In April 2018, we switched to the updated
version, CLIR. This allowed for the adjustment based on age at collection and birth weight, as well as
the easy creation of custom tools for our site, to account for different analytes and local protocols.

      CLIR provides single condition tools (SCT) which generate an outcome in four possible categories.
The lowest category is "uninformative" and corresponds to cases with an overall score of less than the
first percentile. Cases between the 1st and 5th percentiles are "possibly", the 5th - 20th are "likely",
and scores greater than the 20th percentile are "very likely". Percentiles are used to standardize scores
between conditions, as the varying number of analytes used to produce a score make the raw numbers
difficult to compare [3]. In our follow-up program, we assigned these scores to three categories--low,
medium, and high risk. The correlation between these two scoring systems are shown in Table 1.
When available, dual scatter plots (DSP) are also utilized to recommend follow-up testing, particularly
for VLCAD deficiency. When a case on the DSP is in the "indeterminate" quadrant, or the "affected"
quadrant, the child is referred for testing, including sequence analysis, while other cases are referred
for repeat screens. Representative cases on the DSP are shown in Figure 1. In general, for normal birth
weight infants with a positive screen for a condition such as phenylketonuria (PKU) or medium chain
Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, 20                                                                                                                          3 of 8

Inatc. yJ.lN-CeoonAataldSechreyend. r2o02g0e, n6,axsFeO(RMPCEEARDR)EVdIeEfiWciency, cases which fall into Georgia's low risk categor3yoafr8e
 resolved with a repeat screen, while all other cases are referred for confirmatory testing. NICU infants

raenfedrrleodwfobrirctohnwfiremigahtot r(y<t2e5st0i0ngg.)NinICfaUntisnhfaanvtes saenpdalroawte bpirothtowcoelisg.hCt (a<lc2u5l0a0tigo)ninoffatnhtes hrealveevasenpt aCraLtIeR
psrcootroecsoilss.dCoanlecurolauttiionneloyf bthyeforellloewva-nutpCsLtaIffR, sacnodredsoiessdnoontedreoluaytinreslyulbtsybfeoilnlogwr-eupporstteadfft,oanthdedporeosvnidoetr.
dReelapyorrteinsuglatsbnboerinmgalrreepsourlttesdtotothethcehipldro'svpidroerv.idReerpionrctliundgesabanroervmieawl orefscuolmtsmtoonthseymchpitlodm'ssporbosveirdveerd
inincliundfaenscay.reTvhiewproesfecnocmemofocnonsycmernpitnogmssyombpsetorvmesd, einveinffaonrcay.sTcrheeenprienstehneceloowf croisnkccearnteignogrsyypmropmtopmtss,a

erveecnomfomr eansdcarteieonn ifnorthteestlionwg, rainskd caotnesguolrtaytipornowmipthtsaanraepcpormopmreiantdeastpioenciafloirstt,easstinnege,daendd. Ncoonasulglotartiitohnm
wcaitnhcaonvaerppalrloepvreinateuaslpiteiceisa,lnisotr, assubnseteitduetde.fNoroparlogfoesrsitihonmalcajundcgoevmeernatl.l Aevsesnutcuha,lictliiensi,cnalosrpseucbiasltisttustesefrovre

parsocfeosnssiuonltalnjtusdtgoegmueidnet.fAolsloswuc-hu,pclaicntiicvailtisepseicniaulinsctesrstearivnesaitsucaotinosnusl.tants to guide follow-up activities

in uncertain situations.
        Table 1. Correlation between Collaborative Laboratory Integrated Reports (CLIR) single condition tool

Tgaubildeel1i.nCesoarrnedlaGtieoonrgbieatwneewenboCronllsacbreoernatinivge(LNaBbSo)rfaotlolroywI-nutpegtrriaatgeedrRisekploervtesls(C. LIR) single condition

tool gCuLidIReliSniensgalnedCGoneodrigtiioannTeowobloGrnuisdcreelienneing (NBS) followG-ueportrgiiaagFeorlilsokwle-uveplsT.riage Level

CLIRUSniningfloerCmoantidvietion Tool Guideline  Georgia Follow-uLpowTrRiaisgke Level
                                                                Low Risk
           PossUibnlyinformative
                     Possibly                                 MediuMmedRiuismk Risk

             Likely Likely

Very LiVkeelryy Likely                           High HRisgkh Risk

       FFigiguurree 11.. DDuualalscsacatttetrerpplolot tfoforrvveerryy lloonngg cchhaaiinn aaccyyll--CCooAA ddeehhyyddrrooggeennaassee ((VVLLCCAADD)) vvss.. VVLLCCAADD
       (h(heetteerroozzyyggoouuss)) ddeessiiggnneedd totorerdeduucecefaflsaelspeopsiotisviteiv(FeP()FNP)BSNrBesSurltessduultes tdoubeiotcohebmioicchalempriocfialleps rinofcialersrieinrs.
       cTarhreieurps.pTerhleefut pcoprenrerleifst ccoonrfinremr eisd VcoLnCfiArmDecdarVriLerCsAcDasecsa.rTriheersboctatsoems. rTighhet cboortntoemr isricgohntfircmorendertruise
       cpoonsfiirtimveed(TtrPu)ecpasoessitoivfeV(LTPC)AcDasedseofifcVieLnCcyA. DThdeefsiqcuieanrceyi.nTthheesmquidardeleinisthaenminidddetleerims ainnaintedzeotenremwinhaetree
       zcoanreriewrshecraenncoatrrbieersdicsatinnngoutisbheeddifsrtoinmguTiPshceadsefsr.omIn TthPisceaxseasm. pInle,ththise erexdamdpialem, otnhde rreepdredsieanmtsonthde
       rsecprreeesneinntgs cthaeses,carneedniisncglacsassiefi,eadnadsims colastssliikfieeldy aascmarorisetrl.ikAeclcyeasscdarartiee:r.2A02c0c/e0s1s/0d9a.te: 2020/01/09.

      WWhhilieleppoosst-ta-annaalylytitcicaal ltotooolslsccaannbbeeuusseeddpprorossppeecctitviveelylytotoreredduucceeFFPPreressuultlstsininththeelalabbooraratotoryry, ,wwee
hhaavveennoottbbeeeennaabblelettooiimmpplleemmeenntttthhisisiinnoouurrpprrooggrraammaatttthhiiss ttiimmee.. RReeppoorrtstsaarreeisisssuueeddttoopprroovvidideerrss
aauutotommaatitcicaalllylybbyyththeelalabbininfoforrmmaatitoionnssyysstetemm, ,aattaapppprrooxximimaatetelylyththeessaammeetitmimeeaassththeeyyaarreetrtraannssmmitittetedd
tototthheeffoollloloww--uuppddaatatabbaassee. .InInththeeinintetereresststsooffnnoottccoonnfufussininggpprroovvidideersrs, ,aannddccrreeaatitninggaassyysstetemmwwhheerree
we are repeatedly telling them to disregard reports that are finalized as abnormal, all results receive

follow-up recommendations, regardless of whether subsequent CLIR analysis by the follow-up team
reports a high likelihood that the screen will be a FP or likely affected. Our main goal in utilizing
CLIR tools for triage of follow-up cases is the appropriate utilization of resources in specialist clinics,
Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, 20  4 of 8

we are repeatedly telling them to disregard reports that are finalized as abnormal, all results receive
follow-up recommendations, regardless of whether subsequent CLIR analysis by the follow-up team
reports a high likelihood that the screen will be a FP or likely affected. Our main goal in utilizing CLIR
tools for triage of follow-up cases is the appropriate utilization of resources in specialist clinics, as well
as easing the burden on families including minimizing confirmatory testing. As a secondary benefit,
it has given us familiarity with the tools, and a solid comparison data set for when implementation
earlier in the screening process becomes possible.

2. Materials and Methods

      To evaluate the effectiveness of the current post-analytical tools for the triage of NBS results,
we retrospectively extracted from our follow-up database all positive screens for four conditions:
Phenylketonuria (PKU), maple syrup urine disease (MSUD), MCAD deficiency, and VLCAD deficiency
for a 14-month period (04/01/2018ｭ06/01/2019). These conditions were selected because they are among
the most common detected by tandem mass spectrometry in Georgia, and enough screens and true
positive (TP) cases were available for comparison. There were no TP cases of MSUD during the study
period, however it was included in the population of screen positives as it is a large contributor of
FP screens from tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) testing. From our database we extracted the
data from the initial NBS, the outcome of the case, and whether the outcome was obtained from a
repeat NBS or confirmatory testing. We also identified the post-analytical tool results (including DSP
results for VLCAD screens) utilized by the follow-up team at the time of the initial triage. As new
cases are added to the CLIR database constantly, identifying the CLIR results that were used at the
time was important for accurate evaluation. The design of this study was reviewed and approved by
the Georgia Department of Public Health Institutional Review Board.

3. Results and Discussion

      The total number of screens extracted for the study was 538. Initially, all screens were sorted
into "isolated" screens, which were those which were abnormal for only a single condition--either
PKU (n = 51), MCAD deficiency (n = 27), or VLCAD deficiency (n = 69), and "complex" screens,
which were those that were abnormal for at least two conditions detected by MS/MS including at least
one of the three targeted conditions (n = 391). Infants who expired before an outcome was recorded
were excluded and repeat specimens on one child with Citrullinemia Type I post-diagnosis were also
excluded. All isolated screens for each condition were included in this study. For the complex screens,
they were first split according to birth weight (above or below 2500 g), and then 50 were randomly
selected from each group. There was a total of 274 complex screens with birth weights < 2500 g, and
117 complex screens with birth weights > 2500 g.

      Summary data for the isolated screens for the three conditions are shown in Table 2, and a flow
chart of results for the SCT used for all three conditions is shown in Figure 2. Among MS/MS conditions,
MCAD deficiency has one of the highest PPVs, however there is an interference that can cause FP
results, particularly in low birth weight infants [12]. Of the 27 positive screens for MCAD deficiency
during the study period, 14 were confirmed to be TPs for a PPV of 51.9%. Ten were resolved as normal,
and three remain unresolved, but are not immediately concerning for MCAD deficiency. Of the TP
cases, all of them had informative scores using the CLIR tool at the time (11 were high risk by Georgia's
categorization and three were medium risk). Of the 13 presumed FP screens, 10 were medium risk,
and three were low risk. A repeat NBS was used to resolve two of these cases, while the remaining
25 cases (14 TP and 11 FP) were all referred for confirmatory testing. A single case with a low risk
(uninformative) score was referred for confirmatory testing rather than a repeat screen due to the age
of the infant (> 2 months), and because the screen came near the end of an extended NICU stay.
Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                           5 of 8

Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, 20                                                                                                          5 of 8

Table 2. Summary results for isolated screens for MCAD deficiency, VLCAD deficiency, and PKU.

*Potential positive predictive values (PPV) considers performance if all uninformative cases had not

Tbaebelne r2e. pSourtmedm. ary results for isolated screens for MCAD deficiency, VLCAD deficiency, and PKU.

*Potential positive predictive values (PPV) considers performance if all uninformative cases had not

CCMoonbnCdnediAteiintDoinorepoArASSbtcebcnrdrone2ae.er7olemnrnsmasl  TP        TP Cases            CLIR               CLIR       Actual       Potential
                                                                                                                 Uninformati      PPV            PPV
                                                                     Cases Informative        Identification
                                                                                                                    CLIvRe      Actual        Potential
                                                                     TP Cases   TP Cases            CRLaItRe   Uninform3 ative
                                                                                                                                 5P1P.V90%     5P8P.3V% *
                                                                       14      Inf1o4rmative   Identification                                   (14/24)

                                                                                                   1R0a0t%e

MPCKAUD  2571                                                        1214      1214           110000%%         332              521.39.05%0%  65(6(183134..322./22%%/%41)9** )*
                                                                                                                                              (122.0/1%9) *
PKU      51                                                          12           12          100%             32               23.50%
                                                                                                                                              2(.01%/51* )
VLCAD    69                                                          1         1              100%              18                1.50%
                                                                                                                                               (1/51)
VLCAD    69                                                             1          1          100%             18               1.50%

       Figure 2. Summary of single condition tool (SCT) results for isolated screens for medium chain
       aFcyigl-uCroeA2.dSeuhmydmraorgyenoafssein(MgleCAcoDn)dditeiofinciteonocly(S(AC)T, )prheesnuyltlskefotorniusorilaat(ePdKsUcr)e(eBn)s, afnordmVeLdCiAumD cdheafiicnieanccyyl-
       (CC)o.APodteenhtyiadlrcohgaenngaessei(nMfaClsAeDn)egdaetfiivceieonrcFyP(Are)s,uplhtseanryelwkehtoatnwuroiual(dPhKaUv)e(bBe)e,nanacdhVieLvCedAiDf adlleifnicfoiernmcayti(vCe).
       rePsouteltnstwiael rcehraenpgoersteindfoaulste, annedgaatlilvuenoirnFfoPrmreasutilvtes arerseuwlthsawt ewreoutrledahteadveasbeneonrmacahl.ieved if all informative
        results were reported out, and all uninformative results were treated as normal.
      There were 51 total screens which were abnormal only for PKU. By our classification system,
there wTheerree3w2 leorwe 5r1isktoctaslessc,raelelnosf which wweerree raebconmormmeanl doendlytofohravPeKaUr.eBpyeaotusrcrceleansscifoilclaetcitoend,swyshtiecmh,
wtheerereawll enroer3m2allo.wThrirsekecwaseerse, callalsosfifiwehdicahs whiegrhe riescko,mwmhiecnhdwederteo ahlalvceonafirermpeeadt stocrbeenTcPocllaescetsedo,fwPhKiUch
bwyecroenafilrlmnoartomrayl.teTshtirnege.wTehreercelmasasiinfiiendg a1s6hciagshesriwske,rewchlaicshsiwfieedreaaslml ceodnifuirmmreidskt.oTbhereTePocfatsheessoefwPeKreU
rbecyocmonmfiernmdaetdortyothesatvinegr.eTpheaetrsecmreaeinisncgo1ll6ectaesde;s twweoredculeastsoiflioedwabsirmthedwiuemighrits, ka.nTdhoreneeobfetchaeusseewtheree
mreoctohmermheanddaedcotnofihrmaveedrdepiaegantosscirseoenf sPKcoUll.eTctheeds;ettwhroeeducaesteos lwoewrebriertsholwveedigahst,naonrmd aolnoenbtehceaurespeetahte
smcroeethnesr. hTahdearecmonafiinrimnegd1d3imagendoisuims orfisPkKcUa.sTeshewsertehreseoclavseeds wietrhe croensofilrvmedataosrynotermstianlgo.nTtwheorwepeereat
nsocrmeeanls,.tTwhoerreemmaaiinniunngre1s3olmved,iuamndrinsiknecawseesrewaebrenorremsoalvl e(fidvwe ihthypceornpfhiremnaytloarlayntiensetmingia., Tawndo fwoeurre
cnlaosrsmicaPl,KtUw)o. Froermisaoinlatuendresscorelveneds,, tahnedPPnVinefowr PeKreUasbcnroeermnianlg(wfivaes 2h3y.5p%er.phenylalaninemia, and four
 classTichePrKeUw).erFeor69isoisloaltaetdedscrsecerenesn, tshtehPatPwV eforer PabKnUorsmcraelenfoinrgVwLCasA2D3.5d%efi. ciency. The utilization of
post-aTnhaelryeticwael rteoo6l9s ifsoorlaVtLedCAscDredenefis ctiheantcywiesrea atwbnoosrtmagael fporrocVeLssCdAuDe dtoeftihceiepncreys.eTnhce ouftialibznaotiromnaolf
bpiocsht-eamnaiclyatlicparlotfioloelssifnorheVtLerCoAzyDgoduefsiciniednicvyidisuaalstwanodstaagreobpursotceDsSsPdutoe dtoistchriempirneasteenbcetowfeaebnntohremseal
cboinodchiteiomnisc.a[l1p3r]oOfifletshein69hestcerreoeznysgroeupsoirnteddivoiduut aalss aabnndoramroabl ufosrt VDLSPCAtoDd, iosncreimwiansatceonbfietrwmeeednttohbesee
acbonnodrimtioanl,sr.e[1s3u]ltOinfgthine a69PPsVcrefoenr sVrLeCpAorDtedeofiuctieanscyabonfo1r.m5%alinfoirsoVlLatCeAd Dsc,roeennesw. Tashecosinnfgirlme TedP tcoasbee
waabsnoasrmsiganl,erdesaumltiendgiuinmariPsPkVscfoorreVaLndCAprDocdeeefdiceidentcoycofnfi1.r5m%atinoriysotelastteindgsacrfteeernas.sTechoensdinsgclreeeTnPwcaasse
awbnaos ramssaigl nfoerdVaLmCeAdDiudmefiricsikenscyo.reAatntdheprtiomceeeodfedthteoacnoanlfyisrmis,athoeryotuetsctoinmgeaoftfetrhaesDecSoPnfdorsctrheiesncawsaes
waabsno"hrmetaelrofozryVgoLuCsA".DAdneafliyciseinscoyf.tAhitsthsaemtiemceaosef tahtethaneatliymseiso, tfhme aonuutcsocmripetopfrtehpeaDraStPiofnorcltahsisicfiaesde wthaes
in"hiteiatelrsoczryeegnouass".VALnCaAlyDsisdoeffitchieisnscaymbeycDasSePatanthde tthime ereopfematan(cuoslclericptetdpraeppparoatxiiomnactlealsysi4fi8edh tlhaeteirn)itaisal
"sincrdeeetnermasinVatLeC".ATDhidsecfhicainengceyinbcylaDssSifiPcaatniodn tshheowresptehaet p(ocotellnetcitaeldfoarpthperodxaimtaabtaesley to48exhpalnatdera)ndas
im"inpdroevteermasinaadtde"it.ioTnhails ccahsaensgaereinadcldaesdsi.fiEcaigtihotneesnhocwassesthweepreotcelnatsisailfifeodr athselodwatraibsaksaentdo reexspoalvneddaansd
niomrmpraolvbeyarsepaedadtistcioreneanlsc.aTswesenatrye-tahdrdeedca. sEeisghatedeenitchaesreas mweedreiucmlaossrihfiiegdh-arsislkoawssriigsnkmaenndt,raensdolbvyedthaes
Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, 20                                                                 6 of 8

DSP were either indeterminate or affected. These were all resolved with confirmatory testing, and
none were affected. The remaining 27 cases were medium or high risk, but not informative by DSP,
and were resolved as normal by a mix of confirmatory testing and repeat NBS. Six positive screens
(all medium / high risk and informative by DSP) were confirmed to be carriers. As molecular testing
was not pursued in all of these cases, there may be additional carriers in the population classified
as unaffected. [14] The goal of NBS is not to identify carriers, thus all cases that were not TPs were
classified as FPs, even if the reason for the abnormal biochemical abnormalities was identified. When
adding cases to the CLIR database, we only upload those with confirmatory testing, rather than basing
it off the CLIR prediction from the NBS.

      The potential improvement in PPV was much better for PKU than for MCAD and VLCAD
deficiency. FP screens for the two fatty acid oxidation disorders are often due to carriers with mild
biochemical profiles, resulting in analyte deviations that impact only the primary markers and with
overlap from TP cases. For PKU, the FP screens are often due to TPN, and even in cases where PKU is
the only flagged elevation, other amino acids may have a characteristic pattern that can take greater
advantage of the post-analytical tools. More complex profiles provide more chances for the tools to
identify distinctive profiles for TP and FP screens. As a specific example, the second most important
marker for the identification of PKU is tyrosine (which is decreased). FP screens for PKU do not have
decreased tyrosine, while FP screens for MCAD or VLCAD typically have mild elevations of all key
analytes, as the same biochemical pathway disturbances are being measured.

      While the utilization of post-analytical tools has been effective for the triage of follow-up cases,
our goal is to have them implemented during the screening process before the report has been released.
It is hoped that by utilizing these tools earlier in the screening process, FP screens can be reduced.
This creates less disruption for patients and their families and lowers the workload for participants
throughout the NBS follow-up system. For low-risk screens with a high likelihood of being an FP,
the ability to resolve them quickly and efficiently is advantageous. Retrospective calculations show
significant potential improvements in isolated screens (Table 2).

      The use of post-analytical tools appeared to show more potential improvement in the LBW
population compared to the NBW group (Table 3). This may be due to abnormal screens in the smaller
babies reflecting normal physiology in this population that cannot be accounted for with static reference
ranges. CLIR's adjustments for age at collection and BW can more smoothly account for this variation
and guide follow-up in this population. Due to TPN interference, particularly in premature infants, the
complex screens contain a disproportionately large number of abnormalities for amino acid disorders.
Based on Georgia's algorithms in place, 30 of the NBW screens and 29 of the LBW screens were resolved
with repeat screens. In the NBW population, of the 42 screens that provided an informative score, 24 of
these were abnormal only for PKU. In the LBW population, nine of the 18 screens were abnormal only
for PKU. An inspection of the underlying results showed that most of these cases triggered outliers for
tools designed to detect MSUD and other amino acid disorders. The creation of a tool or algorithm
to flag results that are likely due to TPN could provide further assistance in the triage of these cases.
Improvements in PPV from the complex screen population could not be calculated, as no TP cases
for the targeted conditions originated from this group. Eliminating all screens with uninformative
results could have resulted in 16% fewer abnormal screens in NBW infants and 64% fewer screens in
the LBW cohort.

Table 3. Correlation and performance of CLIR tools with complex screens. NA = Not applicable; there
were no TP cases identified in either cohort.

BW < 2500 g  Number of                      Average # of   TP Cases       CLIR            CLIR
BW > 2500 g    Screens                Abnormal Conditions            Identified TP  Uninformative
              Sampled                                           0
                                             Per Screen         0          NA               32
                   50                                                      NA                8
                   50                             3.26
                                                  3.04
Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, 20  7 of 8

      Our end goal is to implement CLIR as part of the testing algorithm to reduce FP screens at the
laboratory level. The retrospective data we have obtained on the performance of CLIR tools with our
screens in Georgia will be helpful as we move forward with this. While algorithms will still need to be
developed and validated prior to complete implementation, studies such as this one link outcome to
post-analytical tool results at a local level, which provides important information for decision making.
Simple steps, such as making the decision to not report all uninformative cases could improve the PPV
dramatically, particularly for amino acid disorders where TPN is a common confounding factor. In this
study, not reporting uninformative cases for PKU would have improved the PPV of isolated screens
from 23.5% to 63.2%. This means 32 cases would not have been reported, and the child would not have
required any further medical intervention based on NBS results. In a situation where most infants do
not have a disorder identifiable by NBS, resolving cases as normal as early in the process as possible is
important for an efficient system.

4. Conclusions

      Post-analytical tools have been beneficial for the NBS follow-up program in Georgia. When
utilized for follow-up purposes in the three disorders selected for this study, all TP cases had an
informative score with the appropriate post-analytical tool. This allowed for prompt follow-up testing,
and correct usage of repeat NBS to resolve cases with a lower likelihood of being a TP. Importantly,
this has provided evidence that CLIR's tools appropriately identified cases that required follow-up
attention. CLIR does not underestimate results, making it unlikely that a TP will be missed if it would
have been identified using appropriately set cutoffs. Examination of these screens retrospectively has
demonstrated that screens with multiple mild abnormalities introduce a disproportionate amount
of FP results into the NBS system, and post-analytical tools can be an effective filtering method. For
the three conditions included in this study, no confirmed abnormal results were on complex screens
(defined as those abnormal for less than one condition detected by MS/MS). In many cases, there will
be logical patterns to complex screens in true abnormals (multiple long chain acylcarnitine elevations
can be present), and profiles typical of "complex FPs" can also be identified. Post-analytical tools can
account for these FP screens, however additional granularity may be helpful, as not all FP results are
the same. In particular, the common FP profiles for LBW infants differ from NBW infants, as seen by
the differences in performance with complex screens in this study, and in the results obtained using
post-analytical tools in each cohort.

      The utilization of post-analytical tools in Georgia has allowed for effective triage of results, reduced
the amount of confirmatory testing needed, standardized the communication of NBS results with
providers and given a path forward for the implementation of these tools earlier in the screening
process. These tools have provided structure for the follow-up of large groups of conditions, with
expanding teams of specialists. The standardization of risk scores has been helpful for clinicians, rather
than needing to keep track of multiple cutoff values, and scales of abnormal results, this information
can be communicated quickly and effectively utilizing the CLIR score, and categorization. This model
could be utilized in many state NBS labs, as there are common screening kits utilized, allowing for
shared development work and tool maintenance if desired. The proof of concept shown here identifies
another possible area of implementation for post-analytical tools if the IT requirements to utilize CLIR
tools before results are reported cannot be easily implemented locally.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, P.L.H., A.W. and A.H.; Formal analysis, P.L.H.; Methodology, P.L.H.;
Project administration, A.W.; Resources, A.H.; Writing--original draft, P.L.H.; Writing--review & editing, P.L.H.,
A.W. and A.H. All authors have read and agree to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Int. J. Neonatal Screen. 2020, 6, 20  8 of 8

References

1. Powell, C.M. What is Newborn Screening? N. C. Med. J. 2019, 80, 32ｭ36. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Newborn Screenings and the Price of Being Wrong. Available online: http://projects.jsonline.com/news/2016/

       12/11/the-price-of-being-wrong.html (accessed on 19 August 2019).
3. Minter Baerg, M.M.; Stoway, S.D.; Hart, J.; Mott, L.; Peck, D.S.; Nett, S.L.; Eckerman, J.S.; Lacey, J.M.;

       Turgeon, C.T.; Gavrilov, D.; et al. Precision newborn screening for lysosomal disorders. Genet. Med. 2018, 20,
       847ｭ854. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Hall, P.L.; Marquardt, G.; McHugh, D.M.S.; Currier, R.J.; Tang, H.; Stoway, S.D.; Rinaldo, P. Postanalytical
       tools improve performance of newborn screening by tandem mass spectrometry. Genet. Med. 2014, 16,
       889ｭ895. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Marquardt, G.; Currier, R.; McHugh, D.M.S.; Gavrilov, D.; Magera, M.J.; Matern, D.; Oglesbee, D.;
       Raymond, K.; Rinaldo, P.; Smith, E.H.; et al. Enhanced interpretation of newborn screening results
       without analyte cutoff values. Genet. Med. 2012, 14, 648ｭ655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. American College of Medical Genetics. ACT Sheets and Confirmatory Algorithms; ACMG: Bethesda, MD,
       USA, 2011.
7. Lin, H.J.; Kwong, A.M.; Carter, J.M.; Ferreira, B.F.; Austin, M.F.; Devarajan, K.; Coleman, R.J.; Feuchtbaum, L.B.;
       Lorey, F.; Jonas, A.J. Extremely high phenylalanine levels in a newborn on parenteral nutrition:
       Phenylketonuria in the neonatal intensive care unit. J. Perinatol. 2011, 31, 507ｭ510. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Chace, D.H.; De Jes俍, V.R.; Lim, T.H.; Hannon, W.H.; Clark, R.H.; Spitzer, A.R. Detection of TPN
       contamination of dried blood spots used in newborn and metabolic screening and its impact on quantitative
       measurement of amino acids. Clin. Chim. Acta 2011, 412, 1385ｭ1390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Stinton, C.; Geppert, J.; Freeman, K.; Clarke, A.; Johnson, S.; Fraser, H.; Sutcliffe, P.; Taylor-Phillips, S.
       Newborn screening for Tyrosinemia type 1 using succinylacetone--A systematic review of test accuracy.
       Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 2017, 12, 48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Alodaib, A.; Carpenter, K.; Wiley, V.; Sim, K.; Christodoulou, J.; Wilcken, B. An improved ultra performance
       liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method for the determination of alloisoleucine and
       branched chain amino acids in dried blood samples. Ann. Clin. Biochem. 2011, 48, 468ｭ470. [CrossRef]
       [PubMed]
11. Miller, M.J.; Burrage, L.C.; Gibson, J.B.; Strenk, M.E.; Lose, E.J.; Bick, D.P.; Elsea, S.H.; Sutton, V.R.; Sun, Q.;
       Graham, B.H.; et al. Recurrent ACADVL molecular findings in individuals with a positive newborn screen
       for very long chain acyl-coA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency in the United States. Mol. Genet. Metab.
       2015, 116, 139ｭ145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Hall, P.L.; Wittenauer, A.; Hagar, A. Newborn screening for medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
       deficiency: Performance improvement by monitoring a new ratio. Mol. Genet. Metab. 2014, 113, 274ｭ277.
       [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Hesse, J.; Braun, C.; Behringer, S.; Matysiak, U.; Spiekerkoetter, U.; Tucci, S. The diagnostic challenge in
       very-long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCADD). J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 2018, 41, 1169ｭ1178.
       [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Atkins, A.E.; Tarini, B.A.; Phillips, E.K.; Calhoun, A.R.U.L. Misclassification of VLCAD carriers due to
       variable confirmatory testing after a positive NBS result. J. Commun. Genet. 2019, 10, 447ｭ451. [CrossRef]
       [PubMed]

                              ｩ 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                               article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                               (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
